.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, before:


# Pull Request

## Description
[Provide a brief description of the changes made in this pull request.]

## Related Issues
[Specify any related issues or tickets that this pull request addresses.]

## Changes Made
[Describe the specific changes made in this pull request.]

## Screenshots (if applicable)
[Include any relevant screenshots or images to help visualize the changes.]

## Checklist
[Please select all applicable options.]

[comment]: # (To select your options, please put an 'x' in the all boxes that apply.)

- [ ] I have read the [Contributor Guidelines](../CONTRIBUTING.md).
- [ ] I have updated the [CHANGELOG](../CHANGELOG.md).
- [ ] I have performed a self-review of my own code and ensured it follows the project's coding standards.
- [ ] I have tested the changes locally following `ManualTestingProcess.md`, and all tests related to this pull request pass.
- [ ] I have commented my code, particularly in hard-to-understand areas.
- [ ] I have updated the documentation, if applicable.
- [ ] I have added appropriate unit tests, if applicable.

## Additional Notes
[Add any additional notes or comments here.]

[comment]: # (Template credit: This pull request template is based on Embedded Artistry {https://github.com/embeddedartistry/templates/blob/master/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md}, Clowder {https://github.com/clowder-framework/clowder/blob/develop/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md}, and TalAter {https://github.com/TalAter/open-source-templates} templates.)

Commit message:

Add instruction on how to screenshot in GH templates Fixes #306

.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, after:


# Pull Request

## Description
[Provide a brief description of the changes made in this pull request.]

## Related Issues
[Specify any related issues or tickets that this pull request addresses.]

## Changes Made
[Describe the specific changes made in this pull request.]

## Screenshots (if applicable)
[Include any relevant screenshots or images to help visualize the changes.]
You can take a gif animation screenshot very easily without any additional installation by using this browser-based tool:
https://gifcap.dev

## Checklist
[Please select all applicable options.]

[comment]: # (To select your options, please put an 'x' in the all boxes that apply.)

- [ ] I have read the [Contributor Guidelines](../CONTRIBUTING.md).
- [ ] I have updated the [CHANGELOG](../CHANGELOG.md).
- [ ] I have performed a self-review of my own code and ensured it follows the project's coding standards.
- [ ] I have tested the changes locally following `ManualTestingProcess.md`, and all tests related to this pull request pass.
- [ ] I have commented my code, particularly in hard-to-understand areas.
- [ ] I have updated the documentation, if applicable.
- [ ] I have added appropriate unit tests, if applicable.

## Additional Notes
[Add any additional notes or comments here.]

[comment]: # (Template credit: This pull request template is based on Embedded Artistry {https://github.com/embeddedartistry/templates/blob/master/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md}, Clowder {https://github.com/clowder-framework/clowder/blob/develop/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md}, and TalAter {https://github.com/TalAter/open-source-templates} templates.)
